hello those lovely people at the
national science and engineering
competition have been gathering together
head squeezing science questions and I
have chosen my favorite it comes from
Luke at the Durham Johnston
comprehensive and it is can dogs
actually understand words a dog is a
man's best friend
apparently admittedly it's a best friend
that juice or a man's furniture or
defecates on his kitchen floor or head
butts all his mates in the crotch but a
best friend nevertheless there are many
apparently same people who will come
home of an evening and unload all their
cares on their four-legged friend and
look into those deep eyes and believe
that they understand sympathize even but
how much does the dog actually
understand
well recent research suggests that a dog
can learn up to 160 words although words
in this case mean things like gestures
such as pointing and signals like
whistling but how do they do this often
it's not what you say but how you say it
try this one
take out your mobile phone and then
hunch your shoulders and read all the
names in your contact list set in a very
low angry voice to your dog chances are
he'll become anxious and back away now
do the same thing kneeling down so
you're at the dogs eye level relax your
shoulders and do it in a cheery voice
like that he'll probably run over and
lick your face just as soon as he's
finished licking his ass this is because
the dog uses all its previous experience
of your tone and your body language to
distinguish between when he's being
reprimanded and when he's being praised
in the case of the latter he'll probably
want a dog biscuit some dogs can retain
as much information as a parrot or even
an ape and if the owner of a dog uses
the same word over and over again to
refer to an object or an action the dog
will eventually correlate the two so the
cry of walkies sends him bounding to the
door whereas the cry of Bath will send
him cowering under the bed but some dogs
are really special in 2005 German
researchers carried out annex
on a border collie called Rico who
apparently had a vocabulary of 200 words
10 items familiar to Rico were placed in
another room and he could fetch each one
when verbally instructed and then if an
unfamiliar item was added in the other
room he could still fetch that by a
process of elimination around 70% of the
time remarkably he could also fetch
these unfamiliar items in a new test
with new objects a month later
what Rico was doing was practicing fast
mapping the ability to remember an
object after you've seen it only once
and this put him on a par with a
three-year-old child except of course
that a three-year-old child can
understand an abstract concept so to the
child the word crayon could also be
associated with a drawing but to Rico
the word crayon simply meant fetched the
crayon and you'll get a pat on the head
still good dog
sadly not all animals are equal and
certainly not all dogs along with Border
Collies the brightest breeds include the
German Shepherd the poodle and the
golden retriever whilst at the other end
of the scale the runts of the litter are
the Chow Chow the Bulldog and bottom of
the pile the Afghan hand but this is
only because those breeds at the top are
the newest and humans have been
hardwiring and programming them since
they arrived but let's keep a sense of
perspective about this if your dog's
called Fido and you come home from a bad
day at work and say Fido I've had a
terrible day and I hate my boss chances
are the only word he'll understand is
Fido
[Music]